Permission framework docs for plugin authors (#9702)
backstage/backstage: docs/permission/permission-framework-for-plugin-authors.md

id: integrate-permission-framework-into-your-plugin
title: Permission Framework for plugin authors
description: How to get started with the permission framework as a plugin author
---

The permission framework offers different patterns that plugin authors can use, for integrating their plugins with the Backstage Permission Framework.

The following tutorial is designed for plugin authors, who already have knowledge about how to create a backstage plugin. We will provide a "TODO List" plugin to be used as a starting point.
After integrating the plugin into your application, we will guide you step by step in the process needed for bringing the permission framework onboard of your plugin.

If you feel that you want to try the tutorial on top of your existing plugin, or if you recognize that your real plugin has a similar structure in terms of resource and endpoints, feel free to skip the next section.

## Setup for the Tutorial

We will use a "Todo list" plugin, composed of the `todo-list` and `todo-list-backend` plugins.

The source code is already available here:

- [todo-list](link-to-backstage-todo-list-plugin)
- [todo-list-backend](link-to-backstage-todo-list-backend-plugin)

> 1.  Copy-paste the two folders into the plugins folder of your backstage application.folder into your backstage application plugins folder. Your application structure should look more or less as the following:

Author: the point is that in this tutorial we'll change the actual code of the packages. So publishing the packages will prevent us from changing the code

    ![backstage application files structure](../assets/permission/permission-tutorial-backstage-application-initial-structure.png)

2.  add the new plugin as dependency of your app's backend module:

    ```

>     $ yarn workspace app add @internal/plugin-todo-list@^1.0.0

Author: this was recommended [here](https://backstage.io/docs/local-dev/cli-commands#create-plugin)

    ```

    Apply the following changes to `packages/app/src/App.ts`:

    ```diff
    + import { TodoListPage } from '@internal/plugin-todo-list';

    ...

        <Route path="/search" element={<SearchPage />}>
          {searchPage}
        </Route>
        <Route path="/settings" element={<UserSettingsPage />} />
    +   <Route path="/todo-list" element={<TodoListPage />} />
      </FlatRoutes>
    ```

Now if you start your application you should be able to reach the `/todo-list` page:

![Todo List plugin page](../assets/permission/permission-todo-list-page.png)

---

## Integrate the new plugin

If you play with the UI, you will notice that it is possible to perform a few actions:

- create a new todo item (`POST /todos`)
- view todo items (`GET /todos`)
- edit an existing todo item (`PUT /todos`)

Let's try to bring authorization on top of each one of them.

## Authorize the create endpoint

The first step we need to do in order to authorize the create endpoint, is to create a new `permission` inside our backend plugin.

Let's create a new `permissions.ts` file under `plugins/todo-list-backend/src/service/permissions.ts` with the following content:

```javascript

> import { Permission } from '@backstage/plugin-permission-common';

Author: I don't think we should explain what a permission is at this point.
I think plugin authors should already know these concepts. Meaning that, before jumping into the plugin author's section, they should have read the "permission frameworks for adopters". If we explain what a `Permission` is here, we end up having to re-explain something that has been already written in other sections.

What if we mention "make sure you've read the basic concept at this link" at the beginning?

> import { Permission } from '@backstage/plugin-permission-common';

Reviewer: Sorry, missed this conversation since it got auto-collapsed by GitHub! 

I think linking to the permission concepts doc will cover some of it, but I still think there's an opportunity to talk about what each property is for - the concepts doc doesn't get into details about the shape of the objects in code, and code is what we're looking at now.

Maybe another option could be to link to both the concepts doc and the [Permission api doc](https://backstage.io/docs/reference/plugin-permission-common.permission)? The api doc is a bit light on details now, but if we backfill some extra doc comments, we should get something with a bit more detail, like [this](https://backstage.io/docs/reference/search-common.indexabledocument).

> import { Permission } from '@backstage/plugin-permission-common';

Reviewer: PS - fine of course for the task of adding these links to be a todo! And I'm happy to contribute the permission api doc changes myself.

> import { Permission } from '@backstage/plugin-permission-common';

Reviewer: https://github.com/backstage/backstage/pull/9882/ for the permission type api docs.

export const TODOS_LIST_RESOURCE_TYPE = 'todos-list';

export const todosListCreate: Permission = {
  name: 'todos.list.create',
  attributes: {
    action: 'create',
  },

>   resourceType: TODOS_LIST_RESOURCE_TYPE,

Reviewer: https://github.com/backstage/backstage/pull/9881

};
```

The file contains all the permissions that we are going to use in the next steps.

Let's authorize the create endpoint. Edit `plugins/todo-list-backend/src/service/router.ts`:

```diff

  import { add, getAll, getTodo, Todo, TodoFilter, update } from './todos';
+ import { todosListCreate } from './permissions';

  export interface RouterOptions {
    logger: Logger;
    identity: IdentityClient;
+   permissions: PermissionAuthorizer;
  }

  export async function createRouter(
    options: RouterOptions,
  ): Promise<express.Router> {
-   const { logger, identity } = options;
+   const { logger, identity, permissions } = options;

    ...

    router.post('/todos', async (req, res) => {
      const token = IdentityClient.getBearerToken(req.header('authorization'));
      let author: string | undefined = undefined;

      const user = token ? await identity.authenticate(token) : undefined;
      author = user?.identity.userEntityRef;
+     const decision = (
+       await permissions.authorize([{ permission: todosListCreate }], {
+       token,
+       })
+     )[0];

+     if (decision.result === AuthorizeResult.DENY) {
+       throw new NotAllowedError('Unauthorized');

> +     }

Author: this seems to be a common pattern in backstage.
I also share the same concern. Better to address this separately

+       };
+     }
    }
```

This is what happens when a _Conditional Decision_ is returned. We are telling:

_Hey permission framework, I can't make a decision alone.
Please go to the plugin with id `todolist`, asking to apply these conditions._

Now if we try to edit an item from the UI, we should spot the following error in the backend's console:

```
backstage error Unexpected response from plugin upstream when applying conditions.
Expected 200 but got 404 - Not Found type=errorHandler stack=Error:
Unexpected response from plugin upstream when applying conditions. Expected 200 but got 404 - Not Found
```

This happens because our plugin should have exposed a specific endpoint, used by the permission framework to apply conditional decisions. The new endpoint should also be able to support some conditions. In our case, `IS_OWNER` is the only type of condition we want to support.

Create a new `plugins/todo-list-backend/src/service/rules.ts` file and append the following code:

```diff
+ import { makeCreatePermissionRule } from '@backstage/+ plugin-permission-node';
+ import { Todo } from './todos';

+ const createTodoListPermissionRule = makeCreatePermissionRule<
+   Todo,

> +   undefined

Reviewer: Hmm... after reading ahead a bit, I think it's potentially troublesome to supply code snippets that work around the expectation that rules will always implement both apply and toQuery. I don't think we really want to encourage this mode of us today. Perhaps we should talk about it though - there might be some incremental changes we can make that will mean that people don't have to deal with any toQuery stuff if they don't want to support filter-transformation-based authorization.

Specifically, the `apply` function is used to understand whether the passed resource should be authorized or not.

Let's skip the `toQuery` function for now.

Now, let's create the new endpoint by editing `plugins/todo-list-backend/src/service/router.ts`:

```diff
- import { todosListCreate, todosListUpdate } from './permissions';
+ import { todosListCreate, todosListUpdate, TODOS_LIST_RESOURCE_TYPE } from './permissions';
+ import { rules } from './rules;

  export async function createRouter(
    options: RouterOptions,
  ): Promise<express.Router> {
    const { logger, identity, permissions } = options;

+   const permissionIntegrationRouter = createPermissionIntegrationRouter({
+     getResources: async resourceRefs => {
+       return resourceRefs.map(getTodo);
+     },
+     resourceType: TODOS_LIST_RESOURCE_TYPE,
+     rules,
+   });

    const router = Router();
    router.use(express.json());

+   router.use(permissionIntegrationRouter);

    router.post('/todos', async (req, res) => {
```

## Authorize the `GET /todos` endpoint

> Authorizing the `GET /todos` is similar to the update endpoint: whenever a `GET /todos` request is received, only the items that the user has created, should be returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authorizing the `GET /todos` is similar to the update endpoint: whenever a `GET /todos` request is received, only the items that the user has created should be returned.
```

As in the previous case, the permission policy can't take the decision itself, meaning that a conditional decision should be returned.
Also, here we don't have a `resourceRef` but a list of resources.

Potentially, something like this could be done:

```diff
    router.get('/todos', async (req, res) => {
      const token = IdentityClient.getBearerToken(req.header('authorization'));

-     res.json(getAll())
+     const items = getAll();
+     const decisions = await permissions.authorize(
+       items.map(({ id }) => ({ permission: todosListRead, resourceRef: id })),
+     );

+     const filteredItems = decisions.filter(
+       decision => decision.result === AuthorizeResult.ALLOW,
+     );
+     res.json(filteredItems);
    });
```

> This should do the trick. However, this approach has a downside. It requires to retrieve all the elements upfront and authorize them one by one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should do the trick. However, this approach has a downside. It would force us to retrieve all the elements upfront and authorize them one by one, and mean that concerns like pagination that are handled by the data source today also need to move into the plugin.
```

> The following approach is supposed to be used in case the downstream service or database provides built-in support for filtering items in a more efficient way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid this situation, the permissions framework has support for filtering items in the data source itself.
```

> Create `plugins/todo-list-backend/src/service/rules.ts`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update `plugins/todo-list-backend/src/service/rules.ts`
```

+   const decision = (
+     await permissions.authorize([{ permission: todosListRead }], {
+       token,
+     })
+   )[0];
+   if (decision.result === AuthorizeResult.DENY) {
+     throw new NotAllowedError('Unauthorized');
+   }

+   if (decision.result === AuthorizeResult.CONDITIONAL) {
+     const conditionTransformer: ConditionTransformer<TodoFilter> =
+       createConditionTransformer(rules);
+     const filter = conditionTransformer(decision.conditions);
+     res.json(getAll(filter));
+     return;
+   }

    res.json(getAll());
  });
```

In this case, we are not passing any `resourceRef` when invoking `permissions.authorize()`.

Since there is no `resourceRef` and the permission policy is returning a conditional response, the permission framework can't take a decision
on its own and it's expecting you to take care of this case.
This makes sense, since we would need to authorize each one of the todo items.

We could implement this in a more efficient way.

In case all the items are stored in a database. We could transform each permission result in the proper database query, letting the database do the filtering.

> In case it's ok for you to proceed in a more simple approach, it's still possible to use the result-by-result authorization approach mentioned at the beginning of the section.

Author: I've changed a bit, please have a look

Fortunately, our todo service is smart enough and lets us pass an optional `filter` function when invoking `getAll()`.
This is exactly what the `toQuery` present when defining each rule does.

In this particular example, the `isOwner` rule returns a function (expected by `getAll` method). But there is no constraint regarding the shape of the returned object: any type of data can be returned.

> If you want to know more about how existing plugins integrate with the permission framework, check `catalog-backend` here.

Reviewer 2: Because of the way in which we implemented the catalog backend integration, it may be a bit too heavyweight to point plugin authors as an example - this was one of the things discussed when designing the integration implementation, I think: that the way in which we tackled catalog may not be representative of what most plugin authors need.
